We depend on many powerful man-made things
to deliver the items that we need.
For example, a powerful freight train
can climb steep hills
and deliver its freight on time.
A powerful cargo ship can withstand
high seas and deliver its cargo.
But there is a limit
to what man’s ingenuity can do.
When it comes to our most crucial needs,
such as true peace,
real security, and lasting happiness,
humans promise what they
do not have the power to deliver.
Political, religious,
and financial institutions
have proved to be untrustworthy.
With so many promises broken,
we’re not surprised that many people
are skeptical about the future.
But in contrast to such failures,
Jehovah’s promises never fail.
And we are made more powerful
when we trust in his promises.
He always delivers on his word.
Jehovah promises to sustain us
through any trials,
no matter how intense they may become.
Consider Jesus’ example.
No human has faced trials more intense
than what he experienced.
Yet, Jesus had faith that delivered
—powerful faith that carried him through.
With freeness of speech,
Jesus encouraged his followers
to have faith and not to doubt.
For example,
on one occasion while traveling
near Bethany with his disciples,
Jesus used a fig tree
to provide an object lesson
on the need to have faith in God.
The account in Matthew chapter 21
tells us that the fig tree
was barren except for leaves.
In verses 19 and 20, Jesus said to the tree:
“‘Let no fruit come from you ever again.’
And the fig tree withered instantly.”
Now, as a result, the disciples
were amazed and they asked Jesus:
“How is it that the fig tree
withered instantly?”
As we read Jesus’ reply to them
in verses 21 and 22,
please keep in mind that Jesus is providing
an object lesson for them.
So let’s pull out the lesson about faith
as we read verses 21 and 22:
“In answer Jesus said to them:
‘Truly I say to you,
“‘if you have faith and do not doubt,
“‘not only will you do
what I did to the fig tree,
“‘but even if you say to this mountain,
“‘“Be lifted up and thrown into the sea,”
it will happen.
“‘And all the things you ask in prayer,
having faith,
you will receive.’”
That was a powerful object lesson on faith,
especially in view of the trials
that his disciples would soon experience.
But do you see any more
object lessons in this example?
There’s another connection
between what happened to the fig tree
and having faith.
You see, the nation of Israel,
like that fig tree,
had a deceptive appearance.
Although the nation was
in a covenant relationship with God,
it proved to be without faith
and it was barren of good fruitage.
It even rejected God’s own Son.
So by causing
the unproductive fig tree to wither,
Jesus demonstrated
what the end result would be
for those without faith.
To benefit from this object lesson today,
we also need to have faith and not doubt.
In this talk, we will discuss four situations
that show how prayer, study,
and meditation can help us
to rely fully on Jehovah’s promises.
With each situation, we will look
at the challenge we face,
the promise we’ve received,
and our reason for faith in that promise.
Here’s the first situation:
It is when we are tempted.
What is the challenge?
The challenge is to avoid
giving in to temptation.
There are many things that can tempt us
to go down a wrong path
and show a lack of faith.
We could be tempted by immoral desires
that violate God’s laws and principles.
We could be tempted to set
spiritual interests aside
and pursue material things.
We could be tempted to become prideful
and ambitiously try to outdo others.
We must never allow that to happen.
The fact is that there are
many things that could tempt us
to show a lack of faith
and of trust in Jehovah.
So now, there is the challenge;
here is the promise.
Let’s see Jehovah’s promise in his Word.
It is twofold, or two-part,
and we find it at 1 Corinthians 10:13.
As we read it, look for the promise.
Verse 13:
“No temptation has come upon you
except what is common to men.
“But God is faithful,
“and he will not let you be tempted
beyond what you can bear,
“but along with the temptation
he will also make the way out
so that you may be able to endure it.”
What is the promise here?
First, Jehovah will not let us “be tempted
beyond what [we] can bear,” or handle.
Also, Jehovah will help us.
He will “make the way out” for us, it said
—that is, out of any temptation
if we rely on him.
We must have faith and not doubt.
So far, we’ve considered
the challenge and the promise.
Now let’s examine our
reason for faith in that promise.
Our reason for faith is this:
Jehovah knows us better
than we know ourselves,
and his Word says
that we can remain faithful.
At Deuteronomy 30:11,
Jehovah told the Israelites
that what he required of them
was “not too difficult” nor was it
“beyond [their] reach,” he said.
So for good reason,
he expected them to show faith and to obey.
He expects no less of his servants today.
Let’s consider some practical steps
that will help us to resist temptations.
We will list them first,
and then we will look
more closely at two of the steps.
First, pray regularly
for the needed strength.
Second, study and meditate
so as to keep your mind fixed
on Jehovah’s promises.
Third, know your weaknesses.
And fourth, avoid situations
that would increase temptation.
Now let’s look more closely
at steps three and four.
They are the need to know our weaknesses
and how to avoid situations
that cause temptation for us.
We’re going to begin with a chain.
It’s a fact that a chain
is only as strong as its weakest link, true?
Where it is weak
is where it will break first.
Like a chain, we have weaknesses
that others may not see,
but we should know our weaknesses.
Make certain that you know yourself
and that you know
where you are most vulnerable.
When we know our weaknesses,
we know what to guard against.
In other words,
we know where the weak link is.
When we know our weaknesses,
then we’re able to stand “firm in the faith.”
One sister said: “When I face temptation,
I reject it immediately.
“Letting the mind dwell on the possibilities
is what gets you into trouble
in the first place.”
So, again, know your weaknesses
and guard against those weaknesses.
Another important step that we listed
is to avoid situations
that increase temptation.
Stay away from people
whose speech and conduct
make wrongdoing look attractive.
Remove yourself from situations
where you know
you’re going to face temptations.
Surround yourself with friends
who encourage you to do what is right.
Proverbs 22:3 says:
“The shrewd one sees the danger
and conceals himself,
but the inexperienced keep right on going
and suffer the consequences.”
We prove to be shrewd
when we trust that inspired statement
and avoid temptation.
So in review of when we are tempted,
we looked at the challenge, the promise,
and our reason for faith in that promise.
Then we considered
what will help us to succeed,
which included the need to pray regularly
and to study and meditate on God’s Word.
With each of the next three situations,
we will follow the same pattern.
The next situation in which we
must rely on Jehovah’s promise
has to do with when we face opposition.
Here’s the challenge:
Avoid compromising under pressure.
No doubt all of us think at times about how
we would handle various problems
that may eventually confront us.
Such mental exercises can be helpful,
provided that we remember that Jehovah
will always be with us
when we are doing his will,
which brings us to his promise
that Jehovah will give us his holy spirit
so that we can endure opposition.
Jesus is one who trusted in that promise.
He also urged his followers to remain calm
and show trust.
Consider what he said at Luke 12:11, 12.
Now, as we read Jesus’ words,
have in mind that the scribes
and the Pharisees
were putting extreme pressure
on him with many questions
in an effort to use Jesus’ words against him.
Of course, they failed.
And Jesus here gives
assurance that, like him,
we too will succeed when persecution comes
if we have faith and do not doubt.
At Luke 12:11, 12, Jesus said:
“When they bring you
in before public assemblies,
“government officials, and authorities,
“do not become anxious about how
or what you will speak in defense
“or what you will say,
“for the holy spirit will
teach you in that very hour
the things you should say.”
How can we receive the benefits
of this promise when opposition comes?
By listening carefully to Jesus’ words there:
“Do not become anxious.”
Jesus said to remain calm,
“for the holy spirit will teach you.”
Show trust.
Jesus is the greatest example of one
who lived by those very words,
and we can too.
But it takes faith.
So, again, we’ve looked
at the challenge and the promise.
Now let’s examine our reason for faith
in that promise, and it is this:
Jehovah is more powerful
—infinitely more powerful—
than any opposer.
Here are three things all centered on Jehovah
that will help us to face
persecution and opposition.
First, pray regularly, and when doing so,
express your fears to Jehovah
and ask for the “peace of God.”
In the book of Lamentations,
the inspired writer urged God’s people
to “pour out [their] heart like water.”
Water can flow quickly,
and like water flowing out of a large bucket,
we should not hold back
when praying to our heavenly Father,
especially whenever we are faced
with opposition and persecution.
Pour out your heart to him,
and Jehovah promises that he will help you.
We must have faith in Jehovah’s power
to help us and trust in that promise.
As Jesus said: “Do not become anxious.”
Strong faith will help us
to avoid such anxiety.
Second, we are also helped
to face opposition when we study
and meditate on God’s Word.
Daily Bible reading helps to strengthen
our conviction that Jehovah loves us
and that he will never abandon us.
Focus on his tender qualities
as you read his words.
Feel Jehovah’s love for you
in the things that he says and does.
As you meditate on the words
and works of Jehovah,
reflect on your own
experience in his service.
You’ll likely be able to list
many things that our heavenly Father
has done for you
since you started to serve him.
Yes, Bible reading and meditation
draw us closer to Jehovah,
our Source of strength.
And the more your confidence in him grows,
the stronger your bond with him will become
and the stronger your faith
in him will become.
Now, related to what we just mentioned,
a third thing that will help you
when opposition comes
is to reflect on how Jehovah
has helped you through trials in the past,
and that is exactly what David did.
At Psalm 18:6, he said:
“In my distress I called on Jehovah,
“to my God I kept crying for help.
“From his temple he heard my voice,
and my cry to him for help reached his ears.”
So did David recall Jehovah’s help?
Yes, he did.
“He heard my voice,” David said,
“and my cry to him
for help reached his ears.”
David not only remembered what had happened
but he had faith that Jehovah heard him.
David was still putting that blessing to work
because he never forgot
all that Jehovah had done for him.
When you know that Jehovah has helped you
—when you just know it—
never forget it.
We show gratitude when we remember,
and such experiences strengthen us
to face the trials yet ahead of us.
Now, so far we’ve
considered the need for faith
when we are tempted
and when we face opposition.
Now we will again follow
the same pattern with the third situation:
when we are afflicted with illness.
What is the challenge?
The challenge we face when we are
seriously ill is to avoid questioning
whether Jehovah will care for us.
We must continue to remind
ourselves that Jehovah loves us
and that he will never abandon us.
Remember the promise:
Jehovah will sustain
his loyal ones who are sick.
And that promise
is not just a general feeling
that you get from reading his Word.
That promise is a clear statement
found at Psalm 41:3.
We invite you to read it at Psalm 41:3.
But is it a promise to cure us?
Notice what it says:
“Jehovah will sustain him on his sickbed;
during his sickness
you will completely change his bed.”
Did Jehovah use the word “cure” here?
No, he said “sustain.”
“Jehovah will sustain [us].”
The cure will come later.
But his promise to sustain
his servants is a promise that we can trust.
Here is our reason for faith in that promise:
We know that Jehovah has compassion
for those who are disadvantaged
by poor health, among other things.
In verse 1 of that same psalm,
we are assured that Jehovah
will rescue “the lowly one.”
Jehovah makes a similar loving expression
at Isaiah 57:15.
There he says:
“I reside in the high and holy place,
“but also with those
crushed and lowly in spirit,
“to revive the spirit of the lowly [one]
and to revive the heart
of those being crushed.”
“I reside in the . . . holy place,” he said,
“but also with those
crushed and lowly in spirit.”
Jehovah cares deeply for us, doesn’t he?
In his compassion, he draws close
to his faithful ones who are ill.
But while we should have faith
that Jehovah will sustain us
(and that is true, of course,
whenever we face serious illness),
what steps must we take to cope?
Here are three things
that we can do to work along
with Jehovah’s loving support.
First, pray regularly for practical wisdom
to deal with your illness.
James 1:6 says:
“Keep asking in faith, not doubting at all.”
Earlier, Jesus said:
“Have faith and do not doubt.”
One sister with strong faith
saw the need to do her part
when she found out
that she was seriously ill.
She said:
“When I learned that I had
cancer in my lung and colon,
“I thought that I had
just received a death sentence.
“But after I got home
from the doctor, I thought,
“‘OK, it’s not what I expected,
but I have to find a way to deal with this.’”
So, what did she do?
She prayed
—and not just any prayer.
She says: “I never pray, ‘Make me better.’
“I always pray,
‘Help me to be strong
and endure my illness.’”
—beautiful example.
That sister understands
Psalm 41:3, doesn’t she?
If we do not recover from an illness,
we have faith that the cure
is coming in God’s new world.
In the meantime,
we also have faith in Jehovah’s promise
that he will sustain us
through any trial, any illness.
He will “change [our] bed,”
as the verse said,
meaning that Jehovah
will see to it that our sickbed
will not be one of hopelessness.
Rather, we will endure with faith and hope.
Many have found that their
greatest comfort comes from heartfelt prayer
and from reading such
comforting passages in God’s Word.
When we do this,
Jehovah will give us strength
and he will bring
comforting thoughts to our mind.
That brings us to the second thing
that we can do
to work along with Jehovah’s promise
and his loving support,
and it is this: Study and meditate
on Jehovah’s promises
in order to strengthen your conviction
in the new world where you
will have perfect health.
That time is coming,
as Isaiah 33:24 foretells:
“No resident will say: ‘I am sick.’”
But we can meditate
on such wonderful promises
only if we take the time to read them.
So take time to read
a portion of God’s Word every day.
Give close attention to the Psalms
and to what Jesus did
during his earthly ministry.
Such accounts provide
real-life examples not only of coping
but also of godly compassion
for those who are ill.
And we also have such real-life examples
of compassion among us today.
So the third thing that those
who are afflicted with illness can do
is benefit from association
with fellow believers
to the extent possible.
We’ve come to appreciate this even more
after living through a pandemic,
isn’t that true?
One sister who has coped
with serious illness says this:
“Do not isolate yourself.
“Allow friends to help you.
“There may be times when you feel alone,
but don’t isolate yourself.”
That’s wise advice,
and it is Scriptural advice.
Always remember that the love
we see among Jehovah’s people
is just a reflection
of how he feels about us.
After all, he gave us
the ability to love others,
and his people show that godlike love
for one another every day.
So put your faith
in Jehovah’s sustaining power.
Put your faith
in the comfort from the Scriptures
as well as the loving support
of family and friends.
Put your faith in Jehovah’s sure promises,
and hold on to the assurance
that life is worth living,
even when you are afflicted
with a serious illness.
In all that we have considered
about Jehovah’s promises,
we see that faith is the essential quality
that we need to have.
We need faith when we are tempted,
faith when we face opposition,
and faith when we are afflicted
with serious illness.
We also need faith
when we face economic hardship.
After all, we must have certain things
to survive from day to day
and to continue on in our service to Jehovah.
The question is, How well do we cope
when getting the necessities of life
becomes difficult for us?
Food, clothing, shelter,
transportation, and so forth
—you see, when these things
become hard to get,
it can cause anxiety.
That’s a fact.
It can.
And avoiding such anxiety
is a challenge we may face.
If we ever face that challenge,
what must we call to our mind?
Jehovah’s promise.
Jehovah promises that if we
put the Kingdom first,
he will provide the things that we need.
We must have faith in that promise
—strong faith in that promise.
It’s a promise that Jesus
made very clear for us.
God’s Son understood
that in this system of things,
economic hardship would
sometimes befall God’s people.
And he made it a point to include
some comments about this challenge
in his well-known Sermon on the Mount.
But along with the challenge,
he provided Jehovah’s promise.
Please follow along
as we read Matthew chapter 6
and verse 33
—Matthew 6:33.
Jesus lived as a human,
and here’s a point we want to keep in mind
as we get ready to read this verse.
He grew up in a hardworking family.
It may be that acquiring
the necessities of life
did not always come easy for them,
but they trusted in Jehovah,
and they had what they needed to serve him.
So, what Jesus later
said here at Matthew 6:33,
he said as a real person
—a human—
who knew what people faced at times.
So with that context, he had just urged
his listeners to stop being anxious
and to trust in Jehovah’s ability
to help them.
And then he gave the promise in verse 33:
“Keep on, then,” he said, “seeking first
the Kingdom and his righteousness,
“and all these other things
will be added to you.”
The conviction in that statement
“will be added”
stems from the certainty of the promise.
Jehovah cannot lie, and his Son does not lie.
If we put the interests of the Kingdom first,
we will experience the blessings
that come from that promise.
We have many reasons
to have faith in those words.
Consider: Jehovah provides daily
for the needs of plants and of birds.
So how much more
so for his faithful servants!
We know that this is true
not only because the Scriptures tell us so
but also because we see it for ourselves.
At Matthew 6:26-29,
just before urging his disciples
to put the Kingdom first,
Jesus invited them to “observe intently
the birds of heaven.”
Why?
What did he want his disciples to see?
He wanted them to see
how our heavenly Father cares
for those little creatures
—how he looks after them
and sees that they have their daily food.
They have what they need.
Birds do not spend
their days feeling anxious,
and neither should we.
Jesus rhetorically asked:
“Are you not worth more than they are?”
Such lessons remind us
that we should trust Jehovah’s promise
and in his ability and desire to keep it.
We learned from Jesus’ Sermon
on the Mount that real happiness and security
do not depend on material things.
What matters is our friendship
with our heavenly Father.
So there are the lessons.
But in practical terms,
how can you avoid anxiety
over economic hardship?
Remember to pray continually.
When anxiety takes hold of a person,
he or she might overlook things
that they normally would never overlook.
Keep praying,
and have faith in Jehovah’s promise.
He listens to our prayers.
And pray just as Jesus taught us,
not for financial security,
but for our daily needs,
“our bread for this day,” as he said.
And along with prayer,
remember to study and meditate
on God’s Word each day.
This too can be overlooked
when one feels overwhelmed.
Don’t let that happen to you.
Jehovah will see your effort,
and he will bless you for relying on him.
Study and meditate in order
to strengthen your conviction
that Jehovah will take care of you.
He promises to do so.
In all of this,
don’t forget your past blessings.
Just as Jehovah sustained
his people in the past,
reflect on how Jehovah has helped you.
He has not changed.
Use that experience to build up
your faith and your conviction
that Jehovah will go on helping you
through difficult times.
We live in a largely faithless
and skeptical world, isn’t that true?
We need faith, and when we have it,
we must keep it strong.
When we have faith
in Jehovah’s promises and do not doubt,
we are helped to face
whatever may come our way.
We are helped when we are tempted,
when we face opposition,
when we are afflicted with illness,
and when we experience economic hardship.
In these critical last days,
all of us—each one of us—
needs to keep growing in faith.
Cultivate the yearning that Jesus’ apostles
had toward growing in faith.
We can see their desire
in what they said to Jesus
at Luke 17:5
—Luke 17:5.
Please go to that verse,
and we will also read
Jesus’ reply to them in verse 6.
After hearing Jesus warn
about those who caused stumbling,
we read starting in verse 5:
“The apostles said to the Lord:
‘Give us more faith.’
“Then the Lord said: ‘If you had faith
the size of a mustard grain,
“‘you would say to this black mulberry tree,
“‘“Be uprooted and planted in the sea!”
and it would obey you.’”
In other words:
“Have faith and do not doubt,”
he was telling them.
Now, it is extremely unlikely
that you will ever need
to command a black mulberry tree
to uproot itself and be planted in the sea.
So, then, what was Jesus’ point?
It is this: We are powerful by faith.
Challenges that may seem equally impossible
have been overcome,
or defeated, by our faith in God’s power.
Faith helps us to conquer
any temptation that we face,
faith helps us to defeat
any opposition that rises up against us,
faith sustains us through
any illness we may experience,
and faith strengthens us to trust
in Jehovah’s promise to support us
during economic hardship.
In other words, uproot the mulberry tree,
and plant it in the sea.
As we considered in each of those situations,
we reviewed how prayer, study,
and meditation will help us
to stay close to Jehovah,
the One who will grant us more faith.
Pray for it each day.
Imitate examples of faith found in God’s Word
as well as those serving along with us today.
Remain focused on Jehovah
who fulfills all of his promises,
and he will bless your efforts
to have faith and not to doubt.